hey it's me Destin welcome back to
smarter every day so you've noticed that
moths and other bugs sometimes get
trapped around the light if you ever
thought about why
we're in the middle of the Amazon
rainforest and we have a huge mercury
vapor light that jurcins set up for us
and we are looking at all the different
species that have shown up this is Phil
Torres
he is a what-do-you-call-it entomologist
entomologist is that with a D or T -
entomologist so tonight we are studying
why these insects get caught around the
light the term for this is called
phototaxis so an organism is phototactic
if it responds to light with motion a
positively phototactic animal will move
toward a light and a negatively
phototactic animal doesn't necessarily
have to be an animal I guess think about
it leads or phototactic so here's what
we're doing they are going through are
you are you taking photos of all the
different species and you can get them
out to get one here hold on got it man
I've been moving around I haven't seen
the same species twice that's a pretty
one
that is a crazy look is it Amal yeah is
this how entomologist find new species
you just can't sit around just kind of
sit around and different things come at
different times a night so what we see
now may be completely different like
three hours that's awesome what do you
call these big ones til thanksful that's
a sphinx mall and then what about this
guy with a little Princess Leia ears oK
we've demonstrated that the mercury
vapour lamp is effective in bringing the
species out of the forest and onto the
bedsheet but what we haven't answered is
our question why are they attracted to
light in the first place I was surprised
to find out that most of the literature
on the subject was written in the 50s
60s and 70s it's really old
so here's we're going to do I pulled out
two theories from the literature and
we're going to demonstrate them both
this is an old sphinx moth that I got
two years ago check it out if we take
this and we use it and combine it with
some lunar footage that I got from my
buddy Jack we can demonstrate Theory
number one moths use heavenly bodies
like the Sun at the moon to orient
themselves in free flight the idea is
that they see the moon up in the sky and
they try to keep themselves aligned at a
certain angle with the moon now because
the moon is so far away that angle
pretty much stays the same as they fly
along now imagine we brought the moon
down to the earth as he goes underneath
his viewing angle would change more
rapidly and he has to pitch up in order
to compensate for it this ends up
pointing him just beyond the far edge of
the light source this would induce a
logarithmic spiral which is pretty easy
to define with math we should be able to
look at the footage of the moths flying
around at mercury vapor lamp and figure
out if there's a logarithmic spiral
right I used the Phantom to record some
high-speed footage of those moths flying
around the lamp in hopes of plotting
that longer in the curve but because the
generator was running on AC that light
was blinking and so decided not to even
analyze the footage instead I found some
photos that a Potter named Steven took
and submitted to NatGeo his open shutter
method proved to be more effective look
at those curves do you see any
logarithmic spirals kinda maybe but the
problem is there's several Moss that you
can see flying directly in towards the
light that kind of debunk our theory
doesn't it this leads us to theory
number two if you're a moth in the woods
and you see a little bright spot over to
your side you can assume that
it's a wide open area therefore you can
free fly without getting hit by trees
and sticks and stuff like that so the
theory goes that these species of moths
will align themselves with a light and
fly directly towards it so after looking
at all these theories and making my own
observations I took a high-speed video
of cicadas flying around lanterns
something became painfully clear to me
science does not know why insects that
are phototactic are attracted to light
we think we know but we don't I mean at
the base level we don't know what's
happening this is such a simple thing
for humans thought no we've been
observing this for hundreds of years so
as long as humans have had fire we've
known that bugs are attracted to
artificial light so it was only a matter
time before you even get as things like
the bug zappers hold on you bite a bug
zapper and expect it to work go
there goes her obviously these things
don't work as advertised let me explain
why so if I read the literature
correctly more bugs will go to the UV
light because more bugs can see that
wavelength now this is interesting but
the problem is mosquitoes aren't the
only type of bug that's dying on these
things you might be doing more harm to
the moth population than you are
actually doing to the mosquito
population mosquitoes are actually
attracted to carbon dioxide which is why
they have these little inserts of
octanol or something like that they put
in the bottom of these things one last
thing you see these black baffles on the
side of the bug zapper now that's there
for very specific reason remember how we
talked about how a moth or another bug
will try to go towards the side of a
light source instead of directly at it
now what these baffles do is they create
the illusion of multiple small light
sources so when a bug comes in and he
sees those small light sources he tries
to go for the side of one and
unfortunately he goes directly in
towards the electrified grid getting
zapped anyway that's pretty interesting
so moths and other bugs do not fly
solely on light sources alone they also
use other hues like pheromones how do I
know that moths fly with pheromones
especially while mating I read it in a
book while I was flying
you might be aware that audible actually
sponsors smarter every day
so I recommend an audiobook you can
download it for free and in help smarter
every day right now I'm actually reading
a book it's by a guy named Ito Wilson
Edward Wilson he went to the University
of Alabama just like I did people at
surprise winner he's a really good guy
anyway what's interesting is he is a bug
expert from my state pretty cool the
book I'm reading right now is called
letters to a young scientist right now
I'm reading about moth pheromones pretty
neat it's actually pretty good I'll let
you look out the window real quick is a
you know we're at anyway
letters to a young scientist is about
Edward Wilson's long career and what he
learned and didn't learn while he was
studying insects go check it out the
cool thing is you can learn from his
mistakes and the things that he did that
work
go check it out audible.com/smarter you
can download a free audio book top link
in the video description and help me out
thanks
so the theory is that as you're flying
the closing angle between thank you the
bug and the moon the artificial moon
will change he tries to keep it overhead
and as he's flying
thank you
as he's flying he always keeps the quote
moon on top of him and he just ends up
in this rotational pattern